Bottom line for investors, I am watching
this straight very closely and if it is
hard closed, you're looking at weeks and
maybe couple of months to reopen it and
that perturbation to the global economy
will be significant.
>> Hi Tellus.
>> Hi Miriam.
>> Well, on today's episode we have a
really interesting conversation about
the military, defense and protecting if
possible the Strait of Hormuz.
>> Obviously the huge question on the
markets mind right now, but we also this
upcoming week have a Federal Reserve
meeting. The expectation is that the Fed
is not going to do anything is a near
lock according to the futures markets
and in fact
the market really isn't expecting the
Fed to cut rates now until September.
And of course
what is staying the Fed's hand is what
is going on with the Middle East and the
price of oil.
>> It all goes back to the Strait of
Hormuz.
>> goes back to the Strait of Hormuz.
>> And the reason that that could affect
what the Fed is going to do, remember,
is that
oil not being able to get through the
Strait of Hormuz means that oil prices
are rising which causes inflation. It's
not just oil, it's also natural gas and
as we'll hear about fertilizer as well.
So there are a lot of factors that go
into the cost of goods that we buy that
are rising in price and that can cause
inflation and when the Fed sees higher
inflation or threat of higher inflation,
it may not cut rates as soon as the
market was hoping.
>> And now it should be said though that of
course the other side of the Fed's
mandate is what's going on in the labor
market and the most recent reports were
not that favorable to labor conditions
in the US. The unemployment rate
finally started rising a little bit.
Uh the US lost 92,000 jobs in the report
even though the market had been
expecting 50,000 jobs to be created. So,
this is the tricky time for the Fed when
those things are moving in opposite
directions. Is there fundamental labor
market weakness that they feel like they
might need
to address with interest rates versus
fixing inflation. And I think the Fed's
job is complicated even further by the
fact that like I think central bankers
like in their the the stories their
mothers tell them as they fall asleep at
night are about the 1970s oil shock. And
some people see the enormous mistake the
Fed made was cutting rates during the
70s. Other people feel like the Fed
caused inflation later by hiking rates
too aggressively. Boy, couldn't be a
tougher time to be a central banker
right now.
>> And really everything rests on how
quickly we could get oil through the
Strait of Hormuz, oil prices back to
normal, maybe other sources of oil.
Though I will say I will say too that
the Fed's job isn't, you know, even if
they can see through a little bit the
price of oil, there's other things that
are complicated
>> too. Like remember before this right
before this happened a new tariff policy
went into effect.
>> Totally true. We almost forgot about
that.
>> Yeah, so
>> the news that's been going on.
>> The the CPI inflation numbers have been
coming down a little bit, but I think
people are starting to think about what
the numbers are now, which is in the
sort of 2 and 1/2% range more is kind of
like a a baseline than than something
that that might, you know, kind of where
do we go up from there versus oh, okay,
could those continue to come down? So,
even if this conflict ended tomorrow, I
don't think the Fed has an easy job
right now.
>> Speaking of oil and Iran, we asked
listeners if they've made any changes in
their portfolio since the US and Israel
uh struck Iran.
And a couple of listeners got back to us
with how they have been trading. Uh we
wanted to highlight one listener's
comment. That's Luke Rafter of Denver,
Colorado. He said that he generally has
been staying the course since the second
Trump administration.
>> theme when we get listener feedback.
>> a lot of people are kind of like setting
their allocations and not changing them
a lot. And he said around last spring he
increased his allocation to ex-US
stocks, particularly in reaction to the
tariffs announced at that time.
>> Again, something we hear a lot in our
feedback, people doing more
international stock investing.
>> But his allocation for 2025 still
remained almost exclusively in equities
until the conflict. He said in the last
week or so he's has redistributed his
after-tax investment portfolio from its
previous allocation of about 95%
equities and 5% money market funds. Luke
is 33 years old, so keep in mind that
that's he has that aggressive allocation
>> Not typically a time when people are
buying bonds, right?
>> Right.
Now he's at 85% equities and 15% fixed
income securities such as investment
grade corporate, municipal, and
international bond ETFs.
So he's allocated more toward bonds,
more toward fixed income. And he said,
"Those seemingly small percentages, this
feels like a significant shift for me
given my risk tolerance and age."
I thought that was an interesting um
piece of feedback. So it seems like he,
and you know, some of our other
listeners who wrote to us are also
taking a little bit more of a
conservative posture right now. It's a
slight adjustment, but it's meaningful
for him.
>> It's an interesting time for the bond
market though. Uh you know, we didn't
see Treasuries uh rally as as much as
you might have thought when the conflict
started. People often flee to the safety
of Treasuries, but I think that the
inflation concerns are sort of hanging
over those longer-term Treasuries. You
know, do people really want to lock in
today's yields, or are they worried that
that, you know, yields might be much
higher in the future because of
inflation? And then on the corporate
bond side,
you know, those really feel like the
flight to safety often these days. That
large companies are, you know, pretty
much some of the safest bets out there
and and you know, there are there are
some companies that have a higher credit
rating than the United States of
America. So,
uh spreads on on a lot of the biggest
companies uh have tightened, meaning
that you're getting even less of a yield
pick up for owning them, but it also
means the market considers them less
risky.
>> We also wanted to share with all of you
listeners that we're shaking things up
uh for the next taping of WSJ's Take on
the Week. We want you to be responding
to our listener feedback, and when you
do, record a quick voice memo on your
phone and email it to take on the
week@wsj.com
prior to our next episode for a chance
to be featured. And if you do, you can
also have the opportunity to potentially
get some exclusive WSJ branded merch.
>> Listeners can't see it, but it's a
handsome mug. It features a um cork
bottom to to protect, you know, the
surfaces and keep keep that keep those
drinks nice and cold or hot, depending.
It's a multi-purpose mug.
>> get a mug, a notebook, a pen.
Either way, it will say WSJ on it as a
thank you. So, this should be an
additional incentive for you listeners
to reach out with your feedback.
>> Little little bit of swag.
>> And our lawyers wanted us to mention
that this offer is open to US residents
18 and older.
>> Well, so let's talk about what's been
happening this past week in
oil markets
vis-a-vis what developments in the in
the conflict in the Middle East. Number
one, US officials said that Iran has
been laying mines in the Strait of
Hormuz.
Obviously, that's a significant
development, making it even riskier for
ships to pass through that.
Uh uh
There are also increasing reports of
attacks on ships. So, threats that may
have felt theoretical in the past are
now not feeling so theoretical.
Uh
in response, the US has said it wants to
release oil from the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve. That's the big pot of of oil
that that we keep on hand for these
emergencies.
Uh other countries have also talked
about doing something similar. However,
you know, as as um WSJ reporter Rebecca
Feng pointed out, the the the price
reaction was short-lived. That it
doesn't seem like that is enough to
reassure the markets. And as we're
talking now, Brent crude, which has been
on this wild wild roller coaster, you
know, it might it's it's been, you know,
anywhere between 80 and and 120
recently. It's now back, you know, at or
around 100 as we're speaking. And this
is after that announcement.
>> That's right. The International Energy
Agency said its member countries would
release 400 million barrels of oil,
which is, you know, the largest
distribution in the history of that
entity.
>> And the IEA is treating this as
basically the biggest supply shock
emergency ever.
>> of being happy that, you know, more oil
will be flooding the system, people took
that as a very bearish signal. That was
basically a sign that this is a really
serious conflict.
>> So, as we think now about what should
investors be looking for ahead, uh we
wanted to get a better understanding of
whether there were things that could
happen. Are there
military actions? Are there diplomatic
actions? Are there things that could be
done that would essentially take this
risk out of the market? That that people
would feel like, "Okay, we we have a
better handle on on what's going to
happen and where oil will go from here."
In order to try and address that
question, we spoke with Admiral James
Stavridis.
>> He is a retired US Navy admiral and the
vice chairman of the Carlyle Group,
which is a large private equity firm.
And we should note that we had that
conversation before these attacks on
ships going through the strait had
started to pick up.
>> Even so, he discusses a lot of scenarios
that I think haven't necessarily played
out yet and investors will be really
interested to hear about. He also talks
about some things that might actually
make the picture look a little better
for oil supply in the longer term.
>> He also talks about some sectors of the
market that are actually going to
benefit from this conflict. So, I think
everyone will learn a lot from this
conversation. We have our conversation
with Admiral James Stavridis coming up
in a bit.
>> Welcome back. We're here with Admiral
Stavridis. Welcome to the show.
>> Great to be with you, Tellus, and you as
well, Miriam.
>> The question that I think is really
preoccupied everybody in the markets is
what's going to happen with oil and
specifically the Strait of Hormuz.
>> Sure.
>> It has been effectively closed, at least
as of this recording, not many ships
have been able to pass through.
Under threat from Iran, President
Trump's talked about defending it,
escorting ships, using the military,
Talk to us about what is involved in
defending the Strait of Hormuz and
allowing ships to continue to pass
through it.
>> Well, let's start with the math. We're
here with the Wall Street Journal.
The math is pretty simple and pretty
dangerous to the global economy. It's
20% of oil, but a lot of people don't
realize it's about 25% of the fertilizer
for the world, which means if you choke
off the Strait, you have high oil and
gas prices. We all know that. Food
prices are going to follow longer term
because if farmers don't get good
fertilizer, they can't grow as many
crops. So, it's a big smoking risk to
the global economy.
Um I'm going to bet I'm probably the
only person, certainly in this room, but
probably listening to the podcast that
has sailed through the Strait of Hormuz
dozens and dozens of times on US Navy
warships going back to the 1980s. So, I
know the geography very well. It's about
20 miles wide from land to land, but
that's not what's relevant. It's got a
narrow channel down the middle of it,
which is deep enough for the passage of
these massive tankers. How big is that
little narrow passage? Quite small in
nautical terms. It's about 2 miles wide.
And that's
going north and south. So, each
individual ship is squeaking through
something that's about a mile wide.
That's tight quarters.
And it's hard navigationally in
peacetime. I can tell you that.
I have also gone through it under threat
of Iranian attack, and that's serious.
So, Iran has virtually closed it. What I
worry about is
how can they hard close it? Let's use
that term, hard closure. That would be
by putting mines in the water. They have
sea mines that range in size from
something the size of a small coffee
table to the size of a refrigerator.
They can punch a hole in a merchant ship
or a US Navy warship. So, mines. They
can use small boats to swarm, kind of
like the Somali pirates would swarm on
tankers like in the movie Captain
Phillips, you probably saw. Picture,
instead of one little Somali boat, 100
Iranian speedboats swarming a tanker.
And they could use short-range ballistic
missiles to attack. But, I'll close with
this because it's I think of most
interest to investors. What can we do
about right now?
Right. So,
depends on the level of hard closure
they enact. But, to sweep a thousand
plus mines, we've got three minesweepers
in the Gulf. They're probably more on
the way there. The Brits have some
minesweepers. The Saudis have some
minesweepers. I think that would
probably take a month, minimum, to clear
the mine threat.
You'd have to knock out all the
ballistic missiles around the edge of
the strait.
You've got to go after the speedboats
where they're stored and maintained. So,
all of those targets are being attacked
right now by the United States cuz
Pentagon
>> ahead on this.
>> But, bottom line for investors,
I am watching the strait very closely.
And if it is hard closed, you're looking
at weeks, maybe a couple of months to
reopen it. And that perturbation to the
global economy will be significant.
>> Thinking about it as an investor, I'm
thinking about what's the likelihood
that oil goes through another
you know, like it did at one point this
past week where it went on this insane
journey from $90 to well over
you know, to to over 120.
Um
Do you think that that there's anything
that would happen that would take that
risk off the table? Like, is there an
agreement that we could make with Iran
at this point? And now we're getting
into the bigger question of what is the
end game of this conflict? But but is
there anything that you would say would
would help to reassure the market?
>> I think the first and most obvious
reassurance to the market would be
President Trump
waking up next Tuesday morning and
saying, "I've accomplished my mission
here. I've destroyed their navy. I've
destroyed their ballistic missile
capability. I've destroyed the Iranian
Revolutionary Guard communications. I've
destroyed the remnants of their nuclear
program."
And effectively say he won't want to use
this phrase, by the way. Bush used it,
but
>> Mission accomplished.
>> Please, Mr. President, no banners.
>> banner is
>> in the White House basement, somewhere,
right?
>> I don't think so. I think what he'll say
is we have achieved complete military
superiority.
Iran no longer has an offensive
capability. So, I think at that point
markets would
say, "Okay,
over to you, Tehran." And what's the
response going to be from Tehran?
Because President Trump, frankly, can
declare victory. He can pull our ships
out of there. He can send all his
bombers home.
Terrific. What if Iran decides to
continue asymmetrically by closing the
strait? What if they embark on a serious
terror campaign in Europe or the United
States? Uh what if the Iranians use
cyber much more aggressively than they
have thus far? I always say in war,
unfortunately, the enemy gets a vote.
And so, when we say it's over,
they may not say it's over.
>> Continuing to think about it from
Okay, now, what is the price of oil at
the end of all this?
I was really struck by something a JP
Morgan analyst said in a Wall Street
Journal story.
Uh she said, "It was not just the
worst-case scenario, it was an
unthinkable scenario. The The In the
whole written history of the strait, it
has never been closed, ever."
I wonder if there is a permanent effect
on the price of oil, that there is a
premium or a volatility that is going to
be built into the market because
like you said, you know, this conflict
could reopen at some point. Uh
Iran's leadership could choose to go in
different directions. Iran might be
fractured in some way. How do you think
you
should think about the the sort of the
long-term potentials here?
>> Couple of factors in terms of where oil
ends up.
First of all, is there a permanent
forever risk premium built in? I don't
think so, and I'll come back to that.
But, certainly in the scenario we're
talking about here where a lot of
Iranian oil infrastructure has been
damaged and maybe in their spasms over
the next couple of weeks, their response
after President Trump hypothetically
decides to withdraw, Iran does further
damage to the Gulf States
infrastructure.
All of that, I wouldn't call it
permanent, but certainly to my eye,
we're not headed back to $60 a barrel or
less. I think you're probably going to
float $70
a barrel while you while that package
comes to rest.
But, there's another factor and it's a
word. It's Venezuela. So, over here you
have Venezuela where I think the
administration is going to land the
plane. And what I mean by that is they
will end up with a compliant cooperative
regime in
Caracas led by Delcy Rodriguez who's
become a friend of President Trump. Uh
and
what President Trump wanted and I think
continues to want is access for
investment and that's maybe not
immediately investable, but coming soon
to a uh oil facility near you is an
opportunity to invest. Secondly, and
here we get back to
this particular conversation, oil. We
want that Venezuelan oil flowing.
Venezuela, as you both know, has the
largest proven oil reserves and it's
dirty oil, it's hard to get out of the
ground, you got to
>> destroyed many of their refining
capabilities.
>> and the infrastructure is crushed,
but over time, as that oil comes on and
if we end up with a
fairly friendly regime,
that will help
keep that oil price down in that
initially 70-80 dollar range. And maybe
someday could we get back to 60? Yeah, I
think we could and I'll give you a
scenario where we do. And that would be
uh Venezuela, we land the plane and it's
cooperative. How about this one? In the
course of this year, we have a deal
between Russia and Ukraine. That is not
inconceivable. I think the two sides are
closer than you might think. If that
occurs, what happens? Russian oil and
gas comes out from under sanctions. That
would create real downward pressure on
oil prices. And then
least likely, but we ought to not
completely rule it out in the course of
a year. Let's say in Iran, the people do
ultimately rise up in this moment when
the regime has been deeply weakened. I'm
hoping the CIA and Mossad are in there
trying to ferment that kind of move. If
that regime flips and you end up with
Iranian oil coming back into markets,
you could see oil go well below where it
was. So, bottom line,
I would bet at the moment on higher oil
prices as the year unfolds. But as
investors, you have to be watching the
geopolitics not only of the Iranian
situation, but Venezuela
and Ukraine as well.
>> All right, well, we're going to take a
quick break and when we come back, we've
got a few more
>> questions for Admiral James Stavridis.
>> So, we wanted to ask you a little bit
more about um the defense technology
that's being used here and how this
might benefit defense contractors in the
US. Is there a benefit that you can see,
you know, on initially investors did buy
defense stocks. Was that an appropriate
reaction?
>> Yes, and uh I wish this weren't true,
but defense spending because of all the
geopolitical turbulence and because so
many munitions are being used up. By the
way, not just in the Gulf, but also in
Ukraine in an ongoing serious war in
Ukraine, defense stocks, here I mean
stocks of weapons, are declining.
Meanwhile, stock prices of defense, I
think are going to continue to go up.
Give you a couple of examples. One will
be prices for the so-called primes.
These are the big US defense firms.
>> This is your your Northrop Grumman,
>> Northrop Grumman,
Lockheed Martin, General Dynamics,
Raytheon, which has a new name. Uh
it's also the European versions of the
primes. That's Thales, BAE, Leonardo,
Airbus.
Defense stocks are going to go up
because of munitions being depleted,
because of geopolitical anxiety. And
it's, by the way, also going to go up
because Europe, they're now going to
spend,
they say, 5% of GDP on defense. That's a
huge defense expenditure. Whether it all
comes to pass and how fast, we'll see.
But it's indicative this, and in case
you missed this turn, in Japan, the new
prime minister, who I think is superb,
she has continued to push doubling the
defense budget of Japan from 1% of GDP
to 2% of GDP. That means South Korea's
going to increase defense spending.
China's already doing so. Russia
continues to be in a war. All this
will drive defense spending. So, yes,
defense is a good investment. Final
thought on this, and you you teased at
it. Well, wait a minute, Admiral.
What kind of defense spending? Here, as
investors, you want to be looking at
drones. You want to look at all manner
of unmanned vehicles. We tend to think
of drones as things that are in the air,
and of course they are. Drones, unmanned
vehicles, are also on the surface of the
sea. They're under the ocean. They are
flying through space. A satellite is a
drone. Um any unmanned vehicle, I think,
is going to be a pretty good bet.
AI used for war is going to be a good
bet.
Here's one you probably haven't thought
of.
Laser beams. So, there's a lot there. AI
for war, I mentioned. Last one, um
special forces. Watch how special forces
are used again and again and again. And
I we may see that in Iran before all
said and done. We certainly saw it in
Venezuela. And I think special forces
are going to get a disproportionate
share of defense spending.
>> You mentioned a number of countries that
were increasing their defense budgets,
and I wanted to ask about the other
countries of the region. Um one door
that's been opened is Iran seems willing
to
um endanger or attack some of its
neighbors.
Would you expect them to do dramatically
increase military spending? Is that Is
that Is that a possibility for them?
>> Yes. And it'll be led by the Saudis. I
think you're going to see more
cooperation. There's been a little bit
of tension, frankly, of late between the
kingdom and UAE. We don't have time to
unpackage all that, but I think the Iran
threat has
created more tendency amongst all of the
Gulf Arab states to work together.
They'll also want to work with Jordan
and Egypt, the most populous being
Egypt, of course.
But I I don't see an Arab NATO, but I do
see the Arab world working more closely
in particular on defense spending,
cooperating more with the United States,
and in this is very important,
cooperating more with Israel.
>> You know, given that that part of your
role now is as vice chairman of Carlyle
Group, obviously one of the world's
largest private investment firms, do you
think that there's going to be a big
role for
private capital to develop either new
technologies or or serve some new need?
You mentioned obviously Yeah, primes
those are all public companies, but is
there a role for private capital here
that that is expanded from from from
what they're currently doing?
>> Absolutely. And
people correctly think of Carlyle as a
private equity firm. Actually, our
largest segment is not private equity.
Our largest segment is private credit.
And and so capital. And so, yes, we look
at a lot of opportunities in the defense
world, and we look from smaller
faster-moving,
kind of north of VC, but way south of
where the primes are.
And sometimes that's part of an M&A
strategy to roll them into another
portfolio company. You know, there's a
lot of different things going on, but
believe me, we are looking at defense
spending, and there's a role for private
equity, there's a role for private
capital as well.
>> Well, Admiral Stavridis, this has been
an extremely interesting and thoughtful
and helpful conversation at a tumultuous
and difficult time for for for the world
and and for many investors. So, we
appreciate you taking the time to be
here with us.
>> Well, tell us you're Greek American, so
I'll say efcharisto patrioti,
thank you my countrymen. And Miriam,
thank you as well for being on. You
proudly told me you're 1/8 Greek.
>> Yes, we've got quite a Greek um
>> Yeah, 1/8 Greek is you know, 1/8 Greek
is all Greek as far as Greek Americans
are concerned.
>> it's you know, you need to be a little
bit Greek to talk about shipping, right?
>> Admiral Stavridis, thanks so much for
joining us.
>> My pleasure. Thank you, Talos. Thank
you, Miriam.
Tell you a story when I got hired to be
the Dean of the Fletcher School of Law
and Diplomacy at Tufts, the president of
Tufts got a lot of static for why'd you
hire a military guy? And he said,
because I always wanted one Dean who
knows how to follow orders.